# Combined

Reasons Why (Benefits)

Reasons why we have a mental warm-up:

The number one benefit is that you have an advantage your opponent does not. If we look at mental performance at the middle school and high school level, there is literally zero education, zero clarity, a bunch of myths, and a bunch of half-truths. But the prevailing belief is that there is no mental game at the middle school and high school level—nothing to write home about. There's this belief that mental performance is really only college and up, and it couldn't be farther from the truth.

It's the easiest way to have what I would say are "normal" athletes—meaning average to mediocre to bad athletic talent—perform at a very high level. Simply because if you're focused, if you know what to do, and you work on that thing, you beat someone who's super talented but is wildly inconsistent, emotionally erratic, and can't control themselves. You don't know what version of them you're going to get.

In this way, having a mental warm-up is the first step in having a mentally strong team. If you don't have a mental warm-up, you don't know what version of the team you're going to get.

If I had a top 10 list of the benefits of a mental warm-up, number one would be: your team is aware of their state. They know how to get to the state that they perform best in, whether that's their physical state, their mental state, their emotional state, or their spiritual state. When you show up to compete, if you have a mental warm-up, your team knows how to get in that correct state for them.

There's also a level of awareness of what it means to be in different states. Some athletes really love to be excited and amped up and energized. Those are your maniacs. These are your caffeine, crackhead zoomers, bouncing off the walls. Then there are monks. They are not your maniacs; they don't need a bunch of energy. In fact, if you had a really excited, energized, engaging warm-up with them, they would be frazzled, they would be anxious. It's too much stimulus for them. They're the exact opposite. They want to be calm. They want to feel prepared and ready. They want to know their job and do it well, and they're trying to actually block out everything around them. It's too stressful for them to take in the crowd and the excitement and the energy and everything around. They just want to take care of their job and be in their own space.

Do you think that you're a monk and really a maniac? If you have the same warm-up for an entire team, they're not going to perform their best if it's only one way. This is why I hate those very amped-up and passion speeches with lots of noise and music and lights. It's too much for many of your athletes, and they are actually uncomfortable in those situations. They are not going to play well. They are actually going to start... These are the kind of teams that make mistakes very early on in games or in the first play, and they make mental errors. It's because they are not in the right state.

Even energy is a big way of understanding the benefit of a mental warm-up. For your maniacs who need to hit a certain level of stimulus, it's almost like they play flat; they look dead tired, they look slow, they're lethargic. You can see them almost trying to think. They're not just playing free and fast and excited or to the level that they're prepared to. The reason being that they're not stimulated enough. They're not prepared for the moment or elevated to the moment. It's almost like they're sleepwalking through warm-ups, preparation, and the game. They're not focused. They're distracted. They're kind of almost seeking out that stimulus or dopamine to get them going. If they can't get it, then it'll take them a long time to get into the game, and by the time that happens, the game could be over.

You can lose in the first three plays of a game and you're down 21-0. It's really hard to come back, especially at the lower levels. Like, if in a middle school game you fuck up the opening kickoff, it gets returned for a touchdown, and you're down 7-0. You go to return the kickoff, you fumble it, they recover, and they score real quick. First play of the game, they score. Again, that game's done. It's very, very hard to come back at lower levels. This isn't like college where you can sustain. Most middle school teams can't do a 12-14 play drive. They are not capable of being that consistent in their performance to sustain that kind of play. Instead, that's why big plays are really common at the lower levels, and then the game's over. Because it doesn't take many mistakes, and then you score. So, if you're not locked in and ready, guess what happens? You get scored on, the game's over. You beat yourself up about it because you made a mistake. You don't know how to move on from it, and you're done. The game's over in less than five minutes, and then we're all there for the next 30, but we knew it was over by the first quarter.

As a coach, the benefit of a mental warm-up is creating an understanding for everyone on a team of what their job is. Your job is to be ready and to do what's necessary to get ready. There's specificity and clarity with that; you're not confused on what to do, you're not distracted, you're not in somebody else's business. You're doing what makes you feel best. The end.

At lower levels, where it's easy to be distracted, easy to be where you're not supposed to be, or easy to worry about your neighbor, this is an advantage. You can say, "Hey, we're going to go through our warm-up. We'll do our physical warm-up, and then we'll do our mental warm-up. We'll do three things, and then you're going to be ready to play."

We're not worried about being anxious, worried, stressed out, too amped up, or too low. These are the three things you're going to do, and you're going to feel great. We're going to go compete. We worked really hard in practice for the last, I don't know, two, three, or four weeks. Let's go play a game. Let's go show what we've done, what we've been working on.

From a coaching perspective, it's almost refreshing. It's something off your plate. You don't have to worry about another thing or this kid. Everyone has a job to do. They do their job. They know their job. They go do it.

So, some of the problems of the mental warm-up. Number one is not having one. If you don't have one, there's nothing you can do about it. You're going to be inconsistent, your energy is going to be all over the place, you can be distracted. Mental errors are really easy to make simply because you're not in the right state. Focus is all over the place, emotionally erratic, no emotional regulation, or even understanding how to calm yourself down. So, that means one play will be excited, something bad happens, the next play will be angry, something really bad happens, the next play is sad, but you don't know how to sit there and do your job and play the game and play the sport.

And depending on the sport, like for track and field, if you're not locked in for a sprint, it's really game over. A hundred-meter dash, it doesn't matter for the high school or middle school level, that race is done in 11 to 14 seconds. You don't have time to not be dialed in; you're going to lose.

It's also freeing to know that you don't have to worry about everything. There's only a couple of things to focus on and then go play, right? That's a freeing thing from an athlete's perspective because otherwise, they're going to think that everything counts and everything matters, and if they don't do this, then their parents aren't going to love them, and you're going to be upset with them, and their friends are going to hate them, and they're going to disappoint their family, the school, the city, and on and on it goes. And really, that's not going to happen. That kind of catastrophizing is really easy to do and get you upset and anxious. You don't have to do that. Instead, you can just focus on three things and then go play. Thank you.

I'm going to say this in a way that I know works best for me. And that's they don't know it exists. Like the number one mistake is you don't have anything, you don't have a plan. The next mistake is that actually the things that you think are working make the problem worse. Just like we've talked earlier about different emotional states, if you have a mismatched emotional state based off your personality, you're going to play worse, you're going to perform worse, you're going to be anxious and frazzled instead of excited and ready to compete. And so when we look at mistakes with a mental warm-up, it's you don't have one, or you think you have one, but you don't, or you think you have one, but it doesn't really work for you because it's generic. You can't just Google something. You can't just chat GPT mental warm-up and expect it to work for your 12 to 18-year-olds. It's not how it works. Everything is unique for them. We can have principles in place like your dynamic warm-up. Got to hope you're using a dynamic warm-up by now to warm up your athletes. You're not just sitting in stretch lines. So a dynamic warm-up is simple to complex, slow to fast, right? That's the concept of every warm-up ever that's good. So, if you're a sprinter, you start off with inkling drills, then you might do a march, then you might do a skip, then you might do a bound, and then you might do an acceleration, and finally you'll do a sprint Easy to hard, slow to fast, simple to complex. That principle is going to be the same whether you are a 100-meter sprinter, or you're a miler, that process is the same, but the way that you feel ready for your race might be different. So you might need to sprinkle in the quick leg drill to feel fast. A miler might need an extra lap. At a specific pace to feel that pace that they would need to be at to run the race. You know, a 100-meter sprinter's warm-up and your Miler's warm-up are not going to be the exact same because their events are different. The 100-meter sprinter's race is done in 12 seconds at the latest. Your Miler's race is done in five minutes at the latest, six minutes at the lat So the pace that they're going to warm up at and the way that they feel ready for that race is going to be different. The same way they feel differently physically, they're going to feel different mentally The miler is thinking about pace, the sprinter is thinking about feeling fast and technique. Because, again, the race, the time, the actual event that they're doing is so drastically different A miler could adjust literally intra-lap, meaning lap to lap or in a lap. The 100-meter sprinter has no lap. They have a straightaway, and their race is in three phases and done before you know it. Like literally done before you blink. So again, understand that just like we have different physical warm-ups for our members of our team, which really is the different role or job of each member on the team, we have a different mental warm-up too, because everyone has a different job on the team. Even your captain's warm-up, mental warm-up, is going to be different than your bench player. Think about that. If you're the kind of, like if you're a two-way player on a football team versus a specialist. Like a kicker's mental warm-up can't be the same as the running back middle linebacker. Because the running back middle linebacker is literally on the field the entire game. So their mental thought is going to be about high performance the whole time sustained, staying involved and engaged in the game, being in the flow of it. Going from offense to defense, on offense to trying to score, on defense to trying to stop the other team. But if you're a specialist, you're almost kind of like a panther, like you're slinking around waiting And then, once it's your time to strike, you go and you hit that dang thing. You hit the kick in, you get the points. When it's your time to punt the ball, you punt the ball. If it's kickoff, you kick off. If it's onside, you hit the onside. You don't have any time to screw up. You go in, you do your job, and you go back to the sideline and kind of wait. And so they can't have the same mental warm-up because their job is not the same Like, those are completely different physical tasks. They're going to be completely different mental tasks as well. It's like they're playing two different games because they are, because they have different roles and jobs on the team. 

So we've covered you need to have a mental warm-up, you need to Have a specific mental warm-up for you. It can't be generic. It has to be the correct mental state. I would also say that it has to be an appropriate length, flexible, and adjustable. So if you are if there's a delay, like delays are very common in youth sports. Whether it's a weather delay, whether it's a lightning delay, whether it's the bus didn't come on time, schedules get moved around. On a literal daily basis. Things just happen. There's a car crash. There's an accident, there's geese on the field, whatever it might be. Things happen. This is very normal in youth sports. This is not very normal in everyday life, but it's very normal in youth sports. Things happen. So, if you think that you need to have this long, elaborate mental warm-up, you're kidding yourself. Like, it needs to be something that's actually quite quick and snappy to get in the right state And then you're ready to go play. Now, if you do have an event that's more important, let's say a championship or conference game or something that really feels like it matters, you're playing your rival. And there's more excitement or energy around it. I feel it's appropriate to have a little bit longer mental warm-up or be more detailed or more clear or more specific But again, be adaptable and flexible. Understand, like there's a basic mental warm-up of this is what I need to do to feel good and ready to play. And then after that fact, Then we could tweak or play around with it to get more dialed in. If it's a state championship game, like there's more going on than just you go up, like you go to the home game. You walk in, everything's normal. A state championship game, things aren't normal. It's probably in a different stadium. It's at a different location. There's more fanfare around. There's a bigger presentation at the start of the game. There's all these things that are happening around you Right? They don't involve you. Your response changes, but you don't react to the craziness going on around you. But because that's going to take longer, we should have something planned and prepared so we still feel ready to play and we own how we feel, we control how we feel regardless of the nonsense going on around us That's just a given. So again, the mistake to avoid is don't have these super long, strict, elaborate mental warm-ups. I like three things in my head. I like a way to tap in the way I'm supposed to feel. I like to have a song that I like to play to get me in the right state quickly And a few physical things to know, the combo of mental and physical. I'm ready to play when I feel this way and I have this thought in my head. I'm good to go. So have that in your back pocket of like the literal five-minute rush and go, we got to go play a game. 

Steps: How to Action Steps

So, the first question I always ask in making a mental warm-up is: what do you want your athletes to have in their head as they compete, and right before they compete? If you were to ask your team right now, "What thoughts go in your head before we play a game or before we run a track meet?", you're going to get a lot of blank stares back. The simplest answer is: how do you want to feel when you compete?

And you can start by saying what you *don't* want. For example, when you're on the football field, you don't want to have your head filled with doubt like, "What's the biggest moment?" You don't want to think to yourself, "I can't make this play." Now, you won't tell them this, but just for you to know, you don't want your star player to think, "I'm not good enough. I'm not prepared enough. I'm not fast enough, strong enough. They're just better than me. There's nothing that I could do to stop them. I'm actually so afraid and scared, I don't even want to be here right now. I would rather be anywhere but here on this field. I want to go hide."

Or, really bad things like they're worried about everything. Like stuff that doesn't make sense, stuff they've never worried about before. Things that have never mattered before. And that could be like stupid uniform, little knick-knack things. It could be their shoes aren't tied right, it could be their chin strap is wrong. Little nitpicky nonsense. And really they're just uncertain and uncomfortable.

So, again, think of this list as the "anti-mental warm-up." And the easiest way to build a mental warm-up then is to flip it around and say, "Okay, well, what would we rather have happen instead?" We can reverse engineer all these problems with good questions of how we want to feel.

So, if you're a basketball player, what does it feel like to hit that game-winning shot? What does it feel like to take it? Did you know that you could get spacing anywhere? Do you know the exact spot on the court that you know you can make it no matter what? What would it feel like to be confident in yourself and know, "I'm the kind of guy that has the ball in my hand. I'm the kind of girl that has the ball in my hand. I've made this shot so many times. I've been trusted to make this shot by my teammates so many times. I made it in this big game, in this big event, in this situation, no matter what. This is my spot, I get to my spot. If I get to my spot, I'm calling game, it's over."

What would make you feel alive? Like there's nothing better than being right here, playing with your friends. With your brothers, your sisters, and your teammates. Can you go to that place? What would make you feel and know in your soul that there's no place you'd rather be than right here, right now, making that play? And you know it's going to happen. There's no doubt, no worry. You don't even see the crowd. That's the whole magic of being in the zone and flow. Things disappear. It's kind of like the best kind of tunnel vision. You couldn't even describe how you did it. You just played. You just moved. You just did it. It just happened. It was like it happened through you.

What would that mental state look like? What would that feel like? What is that? Have you been there before? Would you like to go there again?

So, I use these as simple questions because we've had moments before when we've played where we know, "Hey, that's what it looks like to be mentally strong. That's what it looks like to be dialed in. That's when I played at my best." And so the question we're answering with the mental warm-up is: How can I do that again? How can I do that more consistently? How can I do that all the time? How can I do that every time I play? How can I go to that place every time I play? What do I need?

This isn't superstitious. It's not "you've got to wear the lucky underwear plus you have to have the perfect Subway sandwich. And if you don't have the right color Gatorade, everything falls apart." I'm very much against the super anal, retentive, OCD, autistic, hyperfixation levels of things *have* to be perfect. I am not that way. I do not preach that. I don't condone it. Instead, it's "I want to have a toolbox and a plan so I know, for me, I feel safe and secure and ready to play. This is what I need to be stable and perform well. And I'm the only one who can take me there. No one else knows my routine. No one else can do it for me. I own this process. I own this. This is mine. I'm in control and no one can take it away from me."

That's the problem when you have these super elaborate, fixated routines: it's actually a big tell to say you are offloading your mental toughness to, it's very silly, like a Subway sandwich. Are you really going to let a sandwich artist decide whether or not you hit a game-winning shot? Are you going to let a gas station clerk not having the right kind of candy stop you from winning a game? If you have the wrong flavor Gatorade, is that going to stop you from running your best, from playing your best, from enjoying the game with your teammates and your friends? Those are very silly things to put your trust and faith in.

Instead, say, "Look, I'm in control based off of the way that I think, the things that I do, and the way that I feel. I own this. No one can take this from me." That's what I want in everybody's head.

So again, we start with answering these kind of simple questions. I would say generic questions, but no, these are actually specific. What do you want in your head? How do you want to feel? What does it take to get you there? And then from that, we start to build out two mental warm-ups. The first one is your basic one. The second one is your fast one.

Over time, you make it more specific, and you can make it more detailed, or you can fine-tune and tweak what's going to work for you. But first, it has to be your basic warm-up. Just like you have a basic warm-up for a dynamic warm-up, you need a basic mental warm-up. This is how can I feel the best, and how can I be ready to play and get in the right state?

Then you have the abbreviated or accelerated, kind of the emergency, "shit hit the fan, I've got five minutes, I'm going to go play" warm-up. This is how you make it faster. It's so distinct to say, "This is what's in my head. This is how many breaths I take. This is why I feel my brain and body. I'm going to close my eyes, think about this, I'm ready to go play." And that's how you build it.

FAQ: Common Objections

Well, They're just kids, right? Kids these days are just soft. They're weak. They're lazy. Why do they need a mental warm-up? They should just do what I tell them to. My experience is that kids actually really care. Okay, I say "new kids," but these younger kids, they're actually really dialed in. They're more aware of their emotional state and how they feel and how everybody else perceives them than we ever were. They understand the gravity of playing at a young age, and they don't want to disappoint you. They don't want to disappoint their family. Depending on where you're at and how good of an athlete you are, you know, you might see high school and playing really well in high school sports as your way to getting to college sports and the way to the league and you getting your parents out of the "hood." So, I believe that youth athletics is the perfect opportunity to learn skills that last a lifetime.

And the mental game is a game that you're going to play the rest of your life. So I would rather give them the tools and abilities to be mentally tough now and then have that be a skill that they grow and develop for the rest of their life. So, for example, I have a Pre-Game Panic Protocol (PGP), which is a full course on what to do to take anxious athletes from anxious to confident competitors. And my PGP, I will use on my wedding day. It's that important. I've built a protocol since 2010. I used it for my first job interview. I used it for graduation. I used it for business competitions. I used it for the most — my grandmother's funeral. The most important parts of my life have been around the mental game and being ready or prepared for the moment and not falling apart.

So no, kids these days aren't weak and soft. They're not taught skills for life around them. And our job as coaches is to give solutions to hard problems. Our job is to teach and prepare them for what's going to happen to them next. Just like you would prepare them if the team runs slants — like every other pass play — or if they run zone defense in basketball. You would practice against that, right? Just like you would study for a math test. If your math test is about algebra and the slope of a line, I think you're going to have to know `y = mx + b`. And you're going to have to know what that means. You have to find that Y-intercept.

You know, the same way we have very clear ways to handle math problems or defenses or how to beat a defense, we need clear answers for how to handle the mental game. But the only way you do that is you talk about it. You teach it. You break it down so everybody understands where you're coming from. The mental game is not running someone until they puke. A mental warm-up is not telling them, "Think happy thoughts and breathe with your eyes closed." That's really generic bullshit. It's not good enough. And if you go and Google a mental warm-up or you go and "chat with G.P." about a mental warm-up for track kids, your answers are going to be crap. Instead, take part of a practice and talk with your team about what this means and why we do it. And paint the picture of just what a competitive advantage it's going to be when they're ready for the moment and their opponents aren't because their coach didn't have this conversation with them.

And then when you're in practice, practice the mental warm-up — like you practice the physical warm-up. Why would you not practice the other half of your warm-up? I don't understand that. They're not just going to get it. They're not going to get it from osmosis. Like, they're not just going to magically wake up and be mentally tough or more prepared for the event. In fact, the opposite often happens. Mistakes are going to pile up; then they're going to be afraid to make a mistake. Then they're going to doubt themselves; then they're not going to feel like they're good enough to be on the team. And if it's bad enough, they'll quit. And you'll lose really talented athletes from not having an uncomfortable conversation that you are the only one that can have.

So, no, I believe in our kids. I believe that they can be so resilient and tough. They have more stressors in their life than we ever dealt with. Just in 24/7 access to social media and the internet, and constant bombardment from every direction of expectations and pressures. They know what the other kids are doing in their town and how many points they scored and how many yards they got, and recruiting rankings in middle school — just tons of crazy, crazy stuff. Club sports. These are tough kids. And so we need to give tough kids the right tools so they can stay tough and not break because of nonsense.

So here's another one: "Oh, they're just kids. They don't need this. This is too much for them. This is too complex for them." I would say, reframe what you think. I want my eight-year-old to know how to feel safe, secure, stable, and certain. I don't want anyone to take their power away, including me.

So if my eight-year-old gets emotionally hijacked because I'm cheering in the stands, I am failing as a coach or as a parent to empower them as an athlete. And so I don't think that a mental warm-up is too much for them. I think what we're instead doing is we're very clearly giving power back to our athletes and teaching them and showing them the power of the mental game and showing that they're capable of it.

And same deal goes for high schoolers. High schoolers should learn this. Again, it starts as simple as a warm-up, but when you learn some of these mental game concepts, they're going to stick with you for life. You're going to use it on your biggest test. You're going to use it on the SATs. You're going to use it on your first job interview. You're going to use it when you get married. You're going to use it when you graduate.

These concepts work for life and they just get better. Your mental warm-up will just get better. It'll be faster for you to dial in. It'll be faster for you to eliminate distractions. It'll be faster for you to calm yourself down.

So, would you rather that they be addicted to a life full of antidepressants or anti-anxiety meds? And I'm not saying that there isn't a place for meds, but I want to have control and ownership of how I feel. I don't want to be dependent on something or someone when I can be in control.

And so that's why I think this is such an important tool to give them in the toolbox. Say, "Hey, look, you want to feel a certain way? Go do a warm-up. Go take care of yourself. Go regulate yourself. Understand how your nervous system works." Don't offload the way that you feel onto your girlfriend or your wife or your boyfriend or your husband in the future. You decide how you feel. You have the ownership. You're in control, not somebody else. And no one deserves that power or control over you. That's really important too.

Walkthrough Example/Proof:

So, what does this look like? I would say for most people in a team setting, how do you teach a physical warm-up? It's the same concept. You say, "Hey, we want to feel our best! A physical warm-up is the way for our physical bodies, for our muscles to be warm, for us to feel good, for us to be ready to play our sport. So we do this at the beginning of every practice, every game, every workout, because we want to be at our best, and a warm-up helps us get there."

So the same thing for a mental warm-up. Hey, we have complete warm-ups on our team now. We have a physical warm-up and a mental warm-up, and they're integrated. They work together. So your physical body is going to be ready to play. Your muscles are going to be warm. You're going to feel nice and loose and stretchy. You're ready to catch passes. You're ready to shoot shots. You're ready to tackle. You're ready to run and sprint and throw and jump. You are physically prepared over here.

And then also, you are dialed in on your focus and concentration, and you're ready to play over here with your brain, your body, and your nervous system. So I would have that explanation first: the why. Why? Why are we doing this? "This sounds dumb." That's the why. I want you to play at your best. And for you to play your best, you need to know what state you're in. You need to be focused. You need to be prepared and ready. So we're going to get you there. Those are three things: state, prepared, ready. Okay, that.

So, the first bit is state. Your physical state is one thing, but there's also your emotional state, your mental state, and your spiritual state. The fastest way for us to change state is through breathing. Don't believe me? Hold your breath. How long can you hold your breath before you start to get anxious? Then you have to take a breath. Want to feel anxious? Hyperventilate. If you're taking 15 to 16 breaths a minute, you will be anxious. Your heart rate will go up. You will be more jittery. I can guarantee it. This is physiology. Physiology drives behavior. The way your body feels drives the way you behave.

So, we need to know what state we play best in. Is it calm and ready, like a monk? Or is it jacked up and energized, like a maniac? You can reframe or rephrase it however you want, but there is that distinction. I'm the calm, prepared type. I want to have my own inner peace and be ready to play. I want to block out distractions or things that are trying to pull me away from my best. Or a maniac, where I want to embrace and enjoy the energy of the moment. I need a certain level of stimulus and excitement to even get ready to play. I wouldn't think about playing without a little bit of caffeine in my system, a little bit of loud music, the lights are going, the crowd's cheering for me. Know which one you are. So, know and be aware of the state that you play best in.

Great. Next would be "prepared." What do you need to feel prepared to play? Again, this is where people really go off the deep end with their superstitions. They have to have the right colored socks; they have to have the weather just right. I don't think you need to do that. It's just what do you need to be prepared to play? What do you need to be prepared to play your best? So it might be before you even start your physical warm-up, you close your eyes and take three breaths. And you understand why you're playing. You're playing for your family, you're playing for your little sister, you're playing to have fun with your friends, you're planning to make your city proud—whatever it may be, that's what you want to do. And then you have it in your head what you're going to do. "Hey, I'm really focused on making this shot," "I'm going to try and get to this play," "I'm going to do what my coach tells me to do," whatever it might be.

If I'm a sprinter and I'm in the blocks, I'm really intentional about when I get up to the set position, I'm going to hold really well. When the gun goes off, I'm going to react quickly. And then as I push through my drive phase, I'm going to take three really good, punchy steps. So I'm not worried about staying low. I'm not worried about what the crowd thinks of me. I'm not trying to look cool. My way of being prepared is my blocks are really good. And then as I transition from my blocks to my drive phase to my top-end speed, I know if I get to this point of the race, I win. I take over.

And then "ready." Now you combine those things. You combine the state and the things that you have to do to be prepared to feel ready. Ready to play. And so that can be your mood. Are you happy? Are you excited? You can be a little nervous, but it doesn't tip over into anxiety or a panic attack. Everybody's going to feel a little bit of anxiety, or antsy, or nervousness, or energy, but it doesn't have to go that extra step of out of control or overwhelming.

So, do you have a specific song you listen to in warm-ups? Do you have a specific drill that you like to do so you feel calm and ready? Do you have a specific routine? This is really what we're building: a mental warm-up is building a routine for you. And it's right before pre-game, right before competition, right before practice. And then what do you do? You practice it. You do this before practice, you do this before games, you do this before competition, and you check and see, "How do I feel? Do I feel better? Do I play better? Is there a mismatch? Does this not work for me?" But you have to be aware that you have a plan. Like, you have a warm-up. You have to try a warm-up. And then you iterate.

What "iterate" means is, every time, it's like a feedback loop. You do something, did it work or did it not work? "Well, these three things work, these two things I didn't really like." Cool. You can tweak them or you can get rid of them. You can replace them or you can just say, "Then you try it again. Try it again tomorrow, the next practice." "This worked for me?" "Yeah, this worked for me." Great, add it in. "And then I've got my four things to do." Terrific. That's my mental warm-up. It takes five minutes and I'm good to go.

But you can't just say, "Man, I tried your mental warm-up idea and it didn't work for me. This is bullshit. This doesn't work." It's like, "Okay, what did you try?" "Well, I tried thinking happy thoughts and then I played like shit and we lost by 50." Wow, I'm sorry to hear that. So, do you not like your mental warm-up because you lost by 50? Or did you not like the result of the game? Because those are not the same thing. Because you can play really well and lose by 50.

So, again, when we're iterating, it's a tight feedback loop of, "I'm trying this for the first time. It's just a test." It's not a personal reflection of if I'm a good or bad person. I'm not a failure if it doesn't work. It's a test. It's a game. We want to see if this makes us play better. We want to see if this helps us. We want to see if this is a competitive advantage. I like competitive advantages. If I went to a casino, I would want the deck stacked in my favor. I would want all the good cards. I'd want the dice to be the numbers I always want to roll. This is what you're doing with the mental game. You are setting yourself up to win regardless of what's going on around you.

So, we iterate. We try something. This works, this doesn't. Great. Do more of the things that work. This didn't work? Well, we'll tweak it. Still didn't work? We'll tweak it one more time. Tweak one more time. Doesn't work? Cool. No harm, no foul. We'll cut it out. We'll try something else. And if you feel good and ready to play, you don't need it. If you did my routine, it would be like a maniac versus a monk. It's not going to work for you. You're not going to get the right results. It's what you are going to do to get you dialed in. I'm showing you the blueprint of how to build that plan. But you're going to have to do the work and the practice to prepare it and make it work for you.

So, these are going to be the questions to ask yourself or your team so they can create this mental warm-up. Again, it's this first list of questions. It can be sent as a form, and everybody can fill it out. Cool, that's one way to do it.

I would also have a split between the five-minute mental warm-up and the default, the normal. And then, if you want, you can have the special bonus for a super long, mega, really important game, conference championship, big game, rivalry game. These are really just more things to calm you down, more things to get you ready. I would lean on the fact that you'd be more amped up or more nervous than you would be less in those situations.

homework assignment

So now you've gone through this workshop, you've gone through this course material, it's time to do it. Let's build this thing for your team right now. What's something you can put into practice tomorrow? That's what I really care about. I care that you can do this right away. I don't care that you learn this material and it sits in a binder or at a Google Drive and you never touch it, or you signed in once and you never did anything with it ever again. I want the speed to implementation to be instant.

Meaning, what are the problems your team has had? What are the problems your athletes have had? Where have you noticed their mental game has suffered? Where have you noticed that you've lost games because of this? And write out why. What was so bad? What went so wrong? Were they not prepared for the moment? Did they get scared? Were they anxious? Were they afraid? Were they stressed out? Were they worrying? Were they distracted? Were they emotionally hijacked? Were they angry? Could they not regulate themselves? Were they all the above? Were they just a hot mess? Were they lethargic and tired? Did they not get ramped up enough for the game? Did they get too jacked up before pre-game? The opening kickoff happens and you get just the breaks beat off of you? It's like, what happened? We were all ready. And again, we're in a bad situation and we face a little bit of adversity and we crumble apart.

Do you know what kind of athlete or what kind of mentality or state that your athletes like to be in? Especially your leaders and your captains. Your best player. Do you know what your best player is? Is he a monk or is he a maniac? And don't tell me he's one thing and actually is the other because you've never asked or you've never noticed. Or he's trying to impress you or to make you happy or for his team. No, this is personalized. Don't give me generic bullshit. That doesn't help you. The ChatGPT answers and the Google answers don't help you here. You have to have conversations with your team. Okay? You have to be aware of what's going on and when I say aware, I mean literally understand that these things are happening whether you notice it or not. Pay attention to what's going on with your team and around you because these little things are the things that matter. This is what's the difference between a championship-winning team and not, is they understand that all these little things add up.

And actually, there's a lot of things we have control of. And when we take care of the stuff we're in control of, we can beat teams that are more talented than us. Especially at the middle school level. There's just... I've seen it time and time again where uber-talented kids get smoked by crappier kids. And it's not because of magic coaching. It's because that talented kid thinks he has to be the next LeBron and it's too big for him, the moment's too big for him. And it's again, like a local competition, like it's not for anything real. So again, when it comes time for something real, when we're looking at high school athletes who are trying to win a scholarship, who are trying to get recruited, where there is some NIL money on the line. There's real dollars behind this if they perform well. Those are real stressors that my generation didn't deal with because NIL wasn't a thing, and if we accepted a bagel with cream cheese, it counted as a meal.

So understand that the reason you're building this tool, the reason you're going to implement it with your team, is to have this edge that the rest of the teams that you go up against do not have. I can guarantee your competitors do not have this level of clarity. They don't have these answers because they don't know that these are the questions they should be asking their teams.

So with that said, I've laid out why you should have a mental warm-up. I've given you mistakes to avoid. I've given you steps how to build a mental warm-up. I've given you commonly asked questions or objections. I've shown you a walkthrough example and proof. I've given you the templates to build your own. Now is the time. Spend 15 minutes. Go try it out for five minutes at practice tomorrow, to learn the concept and then put it into practice. But if you have time tomorrow at practice, and it's not the day right before a game, let's do it. Let's roll.

With that said, if you've got questions, this is my contact info. You can get a hold of me. This is the start of a bigger thing, which is a pregame panic protocol. So if you have anxious athletes, not just they're all over the place before pregame, but we're looking at maybe the week before or two nights before and they're not eating. And we're really seeing gold medal moments stolen away from kids because of anxiety. This is a more in-depth program and that might be for you if you're seeing your top athletes suffer from this, even your bench players that are your developmental players. They can get ruined by anxiety simply because they don't know that they're a developmental player and their role is to grow and get better. They think they have to be Superman and they don't. So with that, that offer goes to you and we'll talk soon.