So the first thing to understand about the skills of inventory is that everyone's on a journey. and that means we all have different starting points. we have different things that we're good at, different things you're bad at, and we all have a different goal that we're trying to reach. But the secret is that everyone has a goal. Everyone's trying to reach something. And so instead of trying to, Instead of trying to make it across a giant goal with no roadmap, it's helpful to understand that what you want is on the other side of improving a bunch of different skills. So the way that I like to envision it is that it's a giant spreadsheet. So there are things that go on the spreadsheet as rows, like speed and strength and agility, stamina, endurance, flexibility, mobility. Those are all physical skills. But the thing that always gets overlooked Are the mental skills And the truth is that anxiety is a byproduct of mental skills. skills. I'm kind of bearing the lead here, but anxiety is a skill issue. It's something you can work on and improve on just like you work on speed or strength or shooting a free throw or hitting an extra point, catching a football or making that pass in soccer, like anxiety is another skill that can be worked on. in fact the really true way to attack practice then is to find what skills that you're best at that get you closer to your goal and then just working on those a little bit every day. and so what I want you to do now is understand that what we're going to do through building a pregame panic protocol is we are addressing the skills that make up confidence and focus and safety and security. and we're going to build out those skills and give you proof. So when it comes time to perform, this is as normal as practice. This is just what you do. You've gone through 16 weeks of practice, five days a week. So we're looking at over 80 times that you've delivered. And this is another one of those times you're going to deliver.
1. Anxiety is a Skill Issue
Anxiety is a skill issue. you. So unfortunately, your coach didn't teach you how to to handle your anxiety or we wouldn't be talking. And it's a damn shame because this is something that's controllable. It's teachable. It's improvable. And that is not the way that most coaches talk about about athletes with mental health issues. Most of the time, coaches will talk about things that they don't feel in control of. so let's say and they'll probably say to you do you know why it's happening what's wrong with you Some days they perform really great. Other days it's like they're a completely different person. They're inconsistent. And the truth is that you're inconsistent because you're young. You don't know what's going on because you're not aware. and you haven't been taught how to deal with these issues. If you did, you'd work on them just like anything else you work on in practice. you get better and then it wouldn't be a problem anymore. Just like I don't think it's a problem for you to brush your teeth or tie your shoes, anxiety is going to be lumped in that same category. We're going to treat confidence and focus like brushing our teeth and tying our shoes. Those are skills that you do unconsciously and you're competent, you're really good at them. But until we understand that anxiety is a skill issue, If we think that it's this nebulous thing that we can't touch, We're afraid of it. that we don't want it to come up at our biggest times, and biggest meets, that's when we get ourselves ourselves into trouble because we're giving something power that doesn't need to have power over us. and we're gambling instead of taking action and control. I'm not a gambler I don't want your performance to be a gamble either
1. Physical Symptoms vs. Mental Ruminating
Now that you understand that anxiety is a skill issue and that we have a spreadsheet of skills, the big distinction we need to make versus most people's understanding of anxiety is they think it's all in your head. But really, we see a lot of physical symptoms with anxiety that then drive us up this escalator of doom. and it starts small and kind of innocent, right? You might have a little upset stomach in the morning of game day, just a little. It's not enough to bug you, but it's there. Where most athletes go wrong then is they think, well, I have an upset stomach and I can't make it go away. They're trying to crush or or push or ignore these physical symptoms. And really, if they would just note it, and it's like, oh, okay, I'm a little excited. It wouldn't be as bad. And that's a beautiful reframe too for anxiety is it is energy to be channeled as fuel instead of something to be afraid of that's out of our control. control. But it's this inappropriate response to physical symptoms or we let our mind go crazy and wander and ruminate. So either you focus on one thing and you can't let it go, You just fixate it over and over and over again. or this rumination takes you to a completely different place. it's like you're not even in the room with us anymore. anymore. But to be clear, physical symptoms such as an upset stomach, a a headache, dizzy, nauseous, sweaty, gotta use the bathroom a lot, pukey, can't eat anything, or on the flip side, you're drinking a ton, eating everything. anything, these are all, you are trying to calm down physical symptoms and you just aren't aware of what works for you. and so that's where the inconsistency comes into. You don't know what works because you haven't been able to really call out what the problems are. and so something works one day, okay, if I eat this, then I'm not stressed and then the other time and it's like, wow, I ate too much and now I'm really stressed and still anxious you're just seeing I have an upset stomach. you're making small problems worse with inconsistencies.
1. The Escalator of Doom
then the the ultimate problem, right, the worst time, is gonna be this escalator of doom moment. it. And what that means is we've all been there where there's something small and like, God, I want the subsystem to go away. I got this meat, I got this game tonight. and then you try and do everything to make it go away and it doesn't go away So it kind of frustrates you and worries you more like, God, this fucking stomachache won't and go away. Now I'm feeling kind of faint. And then like, what will happen is you're, You're walking up this escalator of panic, and something that would have started small can go into either a full blown panic attack or something that is way outside your control and you can't compete. and repeat. And I want you to understand that you choose at any point you can get off the escalator. You choose at any point you can hit the big red panic button. And I'll teach you how to do that later on. But to have an understanding that the reason that you're going up the escalator of doom is you're trying to control to control physical symptoms, and most likely they're trying to make them go away. and on top of it then you're mentally ruminating on top of those physical symptoms. and so you're creating this high-stress amped up high anxiety honestly high high tension environment that doesn't need to be. The reality is high school sports is not life-threatening. The worst thing that can happen in a baseball game, if you're a batter and you strike out three times is you go home early. if you fall and trip and land on your face in a hurdle race you get up and you get to the end of the line and that's over and your race is done. But no lives are lost in getting last place. It is not a life or death thing. And that's the problem with the escalator of doom is your brain makes you believe like you are in real danger, and real threat, and it floods your body with fear, uncertainty, and doubt. And it doesn't have to be that way.
1. How Emotional Hijacking Works
So, emotional hijacking was something that I dealt with a lot in the healthcare space. I worked with a great team of data scientists. And the thing with data scientists is they weren't really client facing. They didn't talk to a lot of people. And so anytime a client, a hospital or a doctor, someone would want to talk about their data, they'd be really anxious and they'd get worked up about it. In fact, it got to the point where if they saw a certain name in a subject line on the email, or if they saw an area code on a phone number, their body would respond before their their brain would register. And that's emotional hijacking. Emotional hijacking is not you performing your best. It's you getting hacked by something outside of you. And I want you to understand how emotional hijacking works because this goes back to this theme of awareness. when you understand that, hey, I'm getting hijacked by something, it's causing a physical symptom, and then it's taking me up the escalator of doom, there's this very clear process of, well, wait a minute. I don't need to be hacked by an area code. Like that's silly to see if I see the area code for Louisiana, I should not have my heart start rates start to increase. If my boss sends me an email, that's not a tiger going to attack me. It's just my boss. and there's this moment to understand and think and break away from this fear of dying, this fear of this threat and remember that, hey, there's nothing so bad that can happen here that I can't recover from. And if you can have that moment to wait, It might be as simple as 30 seconds of taking a breath. but by preventing yourself from getting emotionally hijacked and preventing yourself from going up that escalator of doom, you're gaining back control of the moment. You're gaining back control over how you feel. You choose how you feel, not somebody else telling you how you feel, or the weather telling you how you're gonna feel. You decide how you feel.
1. Your Brain's Job is to Keep you Safe
and you have to understand through all of this is that your brain's job is not to make you perform your best as an athlete. Your brain's job is to keep you safe and secure. and so that means that if there's any sort of threat that it registers because it's constantly seeking threats. It's constantly trying to keep you alive. So it's alert. It's an alert. it's looking for bad actors out in the crowd. and the reality is that it's a very nervous organ Like, it's trying to keep you alive and safe and not happy. but we can we can and retrain our brain to focus on things, to reassure it that it's safe, to reassure it that this is normal, normal, to reassure it that this is what we're here to do and we're going to do it no matter what. Nothing's going to stop us, not even our brains.
1. Your Number One Goal
Now that you understand all of this, and this is just the basics, right? This is your brain and anxiety. This is how your brain and body work. Your number one goal now is to start to put it into motion with building a pregame panic protocol. So I'm going to give you the tools coming up in the next modules to make your own protocol. But I need you to understand how your brain and body works first, because if you don't, then you're going to have the same problems you've always had. which is I don't know why this is happening to me. I don't know how to stop it. Sometimes I feel like I have it all together and other times I don't. These things really bug me. and I don't know why and I can't make it go away. Okay, well what you're going to learn is I'm going to give you a set of tools they're very specific to calm you down from physical symptoms. So you're in control of your body, not anything outside of you. I'm going to give you the tools of what to focus on and what to do. and it's very intentional. So that way your brain has a job and it can do a good job on making you perform better, not just being scared of everything around you. And then lastly, as we wrap it all up together, The secret is that this is a huge competitive advantage. Like, what's going to happen after this is you're going to go from an anxious athlete to a killer competitor because no one else is mental skills training. happening. Think about how little the mental game is talked about on your team and in school. So this isn't just for like Navy SEALs or for pro athletes. if you're a freshman in high school, a freshman girl soccer player. and you go from anxious to, hey, I have an evidence list. you know I've been working on visualization since September September. And I have a highlight reel a mile long. I'm very clear on my job and my role on my team. And so when it comes time to club soccer, I am just head and shoulders above everybody else because I know exactly what to work on and I never get shaken. Like, nothing phases me, because I know who I am, and I know what my job is on the pitch, and I just go and do my job. It's real simple. That's where I want you to be So let's dig in
Module 2: Building Your Evidence List
1. What's an Evidence List? Why do we use one?
So what's an evidence list and why do we use one? An evidence list is proof to your brain and body that this is who you are. So in math, you know, they prove things like why certain sides of a triangle work together. But that evidence list is proving to yourself that this is the kind of athlete I am, "and this is just what I do." So we use one because in moments leading up to competition, mission, again, most people are going to be impacted by their external environment, things happening around them. So they get caught up in like the stand, at the crowd in the stands or the music playing or the smells of the concession stand or things that their boyfriend or girlfriend said before the game and they're worried about that or things that their parents said or their coach or their friends doing this, and all these things are outside of you. The cool thing about an evidence list is you can go back and go, "Hey, this is what I'm here to do. This is who I am. I don't need to worry about anything else I just gotta go and perform like it's practice practice. So, we use an evidence list to prepare ourselves and our brain and body to be in the right state to perform but it's proof to us and we need it or a little reminder to and say, "Hey, I am that dog. I am that athlete. Like this is my job. This is what I do and I'm really good at it.
1. Mistakes to Avoid when Building YOUR Evidence List
Now you might say, Okay, I started building my evidence list. What are the mistakes I should look out for? so an evidence list is simply documenting what you've already done. It's who you are. It's not outside of you. So mistaken evidence list would be trying to fill it up with too much. The The reality is you don't have to say, well, you know, I've, I wouldn't fill it up with too much I wouldn't fill it up with negative or mistakes. You don't your Your brain, we're giving your brain something to highlight and fixate on. And that's the good things. We're not going to choose the one time that you got anxious or the one time you missed the kick or the one time that you made a mistake or look silly or embarrassed. Your brain's job is to keep you from looking like a fool to yourself. yourself. So we're going to give it all the proof to say that you are a competent, killer athlete. You're really good at your job. So a mistake would be to do the opposite of that and be like, just give me all the shit that I don't want to think about and put it on an evidence list. I don't, I don't, I don't. Well, your brain doesn't understand the words I don't, So it's just gonna flood yourself with the things that you've told to fixate on. So don't miss the kick. You're going to miss the cake Don't make a mistake You're going to make a mistake. I would flip it around and say, "Hey, I'm going to execute what I've drilled. This is normal for me. This isn't outside of me. This is who I am.
1. How to Build Your Evidence List
how to build an evidence list. so the easiest way is just be real about what you've done. So I was a college athlete. I ran three years or I ran two years in middle school. and he ran three years in high school and I ran three years in college. college. And so when I think of my evidence list as an athlete, there is eight years of competitive track and field in there. and let's say a middle school season is 12 weeks long. That means for 12 weeks I went to practice and meets. So I was in track activities five days a week, right? So 12 times five is 60. So that means there's 60 times that I warmed up. That means there's 60 times I ran something. There's means there's 60 times I did an acceleration or I pushed out of a block starter, or did a quick leg drill, whatever it might be. But the reality is that 60 times of doing something It's kind of a lot. like that's over once a week for a year. You know, it's a lot of tries at something. And the truth is I probably ran more than 10 times, let's say every practice and meet, collectively combined, right? So there's 600 times of me doing something. So when you're building an evidence list, you can give yourself numbers that make sense, which is just adding up proof to say, "Yeah, I've done this a lot." The other easy thing to put on your evidence list are big moments. So remember the times that you've made the shot. Remember the times that you've won a game, did something hard, did something you didn't expect to do, Did it when you've retired? Did it when you weren't happy? Here's another example. For example, between the summer of my freshman in sophomore year of college, I had learned a new style of weightlifting and so my strength numbers were going way up. and I was so excited about it. But I had friends over one night and then, you know, The gym was open at 5:45 the next morning at my high school. So I said, "Hey, I'm gonna go lift." And the reality is I hadn't slept. And I went and I lifted and I did my best ever. I had a PR on a deadlift with no sleep. And that was a heck of a reminder to myself that wow, I don't need to be fully rested and I can still lift my best. I can lift stronger than I've ever thought before. It was a huge confidence booster to me because I knew at any time I could lift my best. It didn't matter how I felt. If I fell off, I could still be better. Same deal with my freshman year of college. I went through some brutal workouts. Every workout from August until December was the hardest workout I'd ever done for a long time. That's a long time of doing the hardest work ever done. And so when we finally got to this one Tuesday before our first meet and we ran six 200s. I remember laughing because I'd done 20, You know two weeks before for. And so I built up the confidence that I can do terrible, hard brutal workouts and survive and get better from them and so that's what you you can use as you build your evidence list is build in things that are going to, that you can pull on that have meaning and matter to you when you need them. It's not what your friend thinks. is not what your parents say. It's what's, when are you gonna realize, "Nah, this is who I am." and you can pull it out of you when you need it. That's the evidenceless power.
1. FAQ: What counts? How much do I need? What if I have a bad day?
So some of the Common questions might be like Like what counts in an evidence list? Anything can count. Literally, anything can count. It can be in practice, it can be in a game, it can be totally outside of sport and it can count. because this is who you are. I got a lot of confidence from video games because I'd come through in the clutch literally thousands of times in Halo. and I took that same identity and applied it to sport. or how much of an evidence list do you need? Evan's list you need, what's going to make you comfortable? For me, I didn't need a whole lot right before a meet or right before my event even as a sprinter, It was things that I'd focus on in particular after my warmup. Like I had certain signposts in my warmup to know to know how I was gonna feel and that I was going to be confident and good. So like my quick leg had to feel a certain way and then my acceleration had to feel a certain way. And since I dealt with a lot of injuries, those would be my moments to know how good the workout could be or the practice or the meat could be because I knew through my warmup. Now that was never a moment to say I'm I'm totally scratching everything. I can't do anything that day. but just through the warm-up there are a couple drills like quick leg, accelerations, and I kind of knew. literally those two drills and I knew, yep, I'm gonna be good to go today. things feel good, fluid. This is good. This is, I've had a good week of practice. we're gonna have a good day. What if you have a bad day? What if you have a bad day? What if you had bad competition? What if you really just catastrophically failed? but like everything goes bad today. and you see I'm smiling because it's gonna happen. it like that's I want you to know every athlete has their worst day. LeBron's had his worst game ever. Steph Curry's had his worst game ever. Peyton Manning at his worst game ever. Tom Brady at his worst game ever. Patrick Mahomes at his worst game ever. Shohei Otani's had his worst game ever Trevor Mays had his worst game ever. Messi's had his worst game ever. or whatever, everyone's had their really bad day. But that's not what goes on the evidence list. What goes on their evidence list was, was I put in the work in practice. I was up at this time doing this kind of work nobody else was doing. I showed up and delivered these moments for my team, for my country, for my family, for my fans, for my city, for my town. I've put in 323 days of lifting. I've done 400 days of meditation and yoga. Like, do you build this proof of the kind of athlete you want to be? and all these are like building blocks that support this is who you are. so a bad day doesn't go in the building block because it'd be like something built on sand. that something's going to make you crumble. It's like rotted wood. So we don't need that. were putting in giant pillars of strength and stability and certainty. They don't move. this is who you are down in your soul and this is the proof that this is who you are
1. Watch Me Build an Evidence List in less than 5 minutes
2. Use These Tools to Build Your Evidence List Faster
3. Your Homework: Build your First Evidence List
So now that you've seen me build an evidence list, We've gone through the problems of an evidence list. I even showed you an evidence list builder. Now it's time for you to build yours. And this is just your first one. This is something also the concept that's going to come up all throughout this course is the idea of iteration. we never do something once and that's it we're always going to tweak and try things and get better. This is just your first evidence list. I wouldn't be surprised if by the time you're done with the course you make three more. I encourage it. But I want you to have an evidence list just today of who you are as an athlete. You know, if you're a high schooler, Did you play any sports through middle school? Did you do PE or gym as an elementary schooler? Like, I gained confidence as a kicker in football because of stuff that I did in kickball in fourth and fifth grade elementary school. I didn't know I had a strong leg until I kicked the crap out of ball. and then people noticed and said, hey, "Hey, you're really strong, what the heck?" And then we'd play soccer at recess, and they're like, dang, you got a really strong leg. and then when I got time to kick the football. I was like, wow, you can really kick the crap out of the football. And that's how how my evidence list as a kicker began. As a sprinter, it was the same way. It's like, wow, you're pretty fast. And then we'd time. It's like, wow, you're really fast. And then I'd be in races and practice like, wow, Beery's pretty fast. and that's how it went. then the weight room is the same game I went from okay Okay, we're just starting out. we're squatting a little baby weight to then, okay, Okay, we've gone from body weight of, There's hardly anything on the bar 185 195 then 225. Okay. We've got two plates on now We're talking 275, now we're moving 315. All right, we have three plates on now. This is a different ball game. and then it got all the way up to four. and you're like, okay, this is a different dude. He's picking up and putting down four weights. like four plates on each side, that's a good amount. So build your evidence list based off of the skills that you want to remind yourself that you're confident in.
Your Journey from Anxious Athlete to Confident Competitor.
Everyone is on a journey. You have a starting point where you’re at today and then end goal that you want.
It looks like a number line, kinda like this.
Anxious ←—————————————————— →Confident
Now the problem is that most people try to make this big leap from where they are at today as an anxious athlete to confident competitor in one big swoop.
But they don’t know what it means to be a confident athletes.
They don’t know what to do everyday to work on the skills to becoming confident.
They don’t even know what their problems are or what’s holding them back in the first place.
But what if we took what confident athletes do, broke it down into easy, measurable chunks, and walked ourselves back to today?
Instead of one big jump, it looks like checkpoints in a video game.
Anxious ←—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|— →Confident
That way you know exactly where you are at any point — you are clear where you stand.
You know exactly what you need to work on next — you are clear on the next steps.
You even know what skill you’re building in practice today — you are clear on your journey.
That’s a plan!
That’s what I’m going to teach you with the Pregame Panic Protocol.
You’ll have an entire toolkit that you know works just for you.
You’ll have this for life. It never goes away, it just gets better with time.
And it’s the greatest competitive advantage any athlete can have.
Let’s dig in.
________________


It starts with something you don’t know.
It’s the fact that Anxiety is a skill issue.
If you’re watching this now, it means that your parents, your coaches, your teachers, and mentors did not teach you that how you handle anxiety is a skill. In fact, it’s many different skills.
This is a good thing!
Because it means you can be taught the skills to handle pregame anxiety, just like someone taught you a jump shot, a dive, or how to pass the ball.
You work on skills everyday in school, at practice, when you workout. So this is normal for you as an athlete.
You aren’t broken.
You aren’t flawed.
This isn’t your fault.
Anxiety doesn’t have to ruin your life or steal your gold medal moments away from you.
You simply weren’t taught how to handle pregame anxiety.
Let’s look at our journey again.
Where you are today and where you want to go.
What if we had a number line for each skill that you need to become a confident competitor?
It’d look like a bunch of rows on a spreadsheet.
This spreadsheet is called The Skills Inventory.
That way, instead of making one big jump, we can break down the one big skill of ‘handling anxiety’ into many different smaller skills that you can work on everyday.
It’s completely different than the big vague name like ‘mental toughness’.
What does that even mean? Your coach can’t really tell you either.
But we can redefine what mental toughness means to us as many different mental skills.
Skills like Awareness, Emotional Regulation, Intention, Focus, and Resilience.
We can be specific and prescriptive instead of vague and wishy washy.
Here’s what a small Skills Inventory looks like.
Unaware ←—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|— → Awareness
Can’t calm yourself down ←—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|— → Downregulation
No intention ←—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|— → Intentional
Distracted ←—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|— → Focused
Easily knocked off your game ←—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|—|— → Resilient
If you’ve ever played video games like Madden, NBA2k, or RPG’s like




The first concept to understand in pregame panic protocol is that you aren't broken There's nothing wrong with you. You aren't a failure. You don't need to be fixed. The core issue is that you weren't taught. That anxiety is a skill, you weren't given the skills to deal with it, and you weren't given a plan of what to do on game day. So, if you have nothing else from this course, What you'll take away is you'll go from having nothing to having something. And on one hand, that's incredibly encouraging. It means that you have control over how you feel. And then what I'm most excited about is the greatest competitive advantage you will have versus your competition. Because the mental game is woefully Underappreciated at the middle school, high school, and college level. So, with that, let's get started.
Number one is that anxiety is a skill issue. So we practice skills every day. In sports, we practice our free throws, we practice our block starts, we practice passing the ball to your teammates. For football, it's always about the keys of running, blocking, tackling. And the problem with the mental game is that we just don't practice it. We don't really know what the different skills are. And we just kind of say what we hope we want to have happen, or what we don't want to have happen. And the problem is that it's just like anything else we do in sports, learning how to be mentally tough is a skill. It's actually a bunch of different skills. And this is something that should be taught. This is something that can be learned. This is something that can be practiced every day. It's not something that you're just born with, or it's only for elite and professional or Olympic athletes. Anybody can learn the skills to be mentally tough. And that's a complete difference between what most people think when they think of anxiety and they're thinking, God, I wish this would go away. I never want to feel this way again. Nobody else feels the way I do. When we think of anxiety as a skill issue, then it just like anything else we do in sports, we can learn how to practice and get better to the point where this won't really there'll be a non-issue.
So now that you have a basic understanding that anxiety is a skill issue, let's talk about some of those skills. So everybody's on a journey. And on that journey, you have a goal, which is a start point and an end point. And everybody wants to be somewhere. So, let's say right now you're an anxious athlete and we have to go to a confident competitor. Well, most people try and do that in one big jump. But it's too big. You can't go from anxious to confident in an instant. And even worse, how do you get there? What are the steps? How do you know that's working? That's a lot. So let's make it easier on you. From our start point to our end point, let's work backwards and say what a confident athlete looks like, and let's give ourselves checkpoints along the way. Almost like lily pads jumping across a river, or checkpoints or hurdles that we can work our way back to today. If we do it this way, then actually we know exactly what to work on and practice tomorrow. And if we do that, then we'll make this jump. Even cooler, actually, all of our skills, whether I mean, they could be physical skills like speed, strength, or endurance, but for the mental skills, it could be resilience, it could be focus. It could be concentration. It could be the ability to rebound from bad things happening. It could be a clutch or a gritty skill. And when we start to think of all these different skills like rows on a spreadsheet, we have a skills inventory. And we can map out or mark out where we're at on our journey. And it could be something simple like a 1 to 10 skill, where 1 would be not very skilled or no skill, and 10 would be you've totally mastered it. And we can give ourselves just a quick little checklist and say, hey, where do I sit with this? Am I good at this or not? Do I need to get better? Where do I need to get better? And this allows you to have extreme clarity of what to work on to be a better athlete. And the reality is that this concept alone is the difference between someone who makes a lot of goals and never gets them versus those people who it just seems like they get everything done. This is how they get it done. They're really clear on their priorities and they knock things out. Nothing else in their world really matters besides that top priority and what's going to get there. So this is the skills inventory, and this is the first step in understanding. You understand anxiety is a skill issue. We're going to work on these skills, and at the end, you won't be an anxious athlete. You'll be a confident competitor. Because you'll know what to do when things go wrong. You'll know what to do when you feel the physical symptoms of anxiety. You'll know exactly how to calm yourself down. And anytime you've got those like mentally ruminating thoughts, and you just kept getting more and more anxious because you just can't stop. Those moments too, you'll be able to learn how to calm yourself down. And the most important part to me is that you get. To be your best. You get to be the athlete we know you can be. We get to be the athlete that you're at at practice every day. Just because it's game day doesn't mean you have to be a different person or less than or anything like that. I don't want anxiety to steal your gold medal moment away from you. And I really care about that. So let's move on to the next bit.
Next is the escalator of doom. And the escalator of doom is physical symptoms and mental rumination working together against you. And what happens is that you have a physical symptom that starts out small and innocent, just kind of annoying. Like, hey, your heart rate might be up a little bit. And as you notice it, then you're like, man, my heart's beating a little fast. I can feel it in my chest. I can feel it in my ears. Like, my heart's beating. Why is my heart beating so fast? The physical sensation or symptom is your heartbeat is elevated, but the mental ruminating, the thing on repeat then is, I want this to stop, and I can't get it to stop. And it bugs you, and you worry about it. And as you worry more, you start to ramp up and get more anxious and more stressed out and more focused on it. And you can't let it go. It's like a bad feedback loop. And eventually it gets to the point where it's not just a little thing of your heart's racing, then your stomach's really upset, then you've really got a headache, and you can't stop freaking out. This is at some point you cross the line from I'm worrying about this thing to I don't think I can play. I don't think I can handle it today. I'm going to be sick. And when it's really bad, then it can be a full-blown panic attack. And The most important lesson I can teach you is that through having a pregame panic protocol, you can hit the big red stop button at any point. You're in control. So, you don't have to let a physical symptom ramp you up the staircase or ramp you up the escalator. You can hit the stop button at any point and hop off. And this way, you never get taken up to the point of being emotionally hijacked. Anytime you feel one of these symptoms starting to pop up, you can hit the big red stop button.
So for most people, there's a split in when they feel their anxiety. And that's either they feel it right before competition, or they feel it maybe the day of in the morning. The night before, as they're trying to go to sleep, the week before they're worrying about it, thinking about a big competition. But I want you to think. When do I feel the most anxious? Is it right before or is it a longer time before?
One of the best tools to combat pregame anxiety is an evidence list. What's an evidence list? It's like proof to your brain and body that you're capable of competing. Most people don't actually realize how many things they do to be ready to perform. If you're a high school athlete, you've probably had an offseason. You've probably done some kind of conditioning. You've been to practice every day. You might even have an outside trainer, and you've been playing the sport for a while. And the reality is that We can use our biggest emotional moments, or we can use just raw numbers and data to flood our brain with proof. Hey. I've got this. This is just what I do. It's the same as what I do every day in practice. This is just a different building with different people around me.
And the reason that I love an evidence list, and I use one every day, is Anytime there's fear, uncertainty, or doubt, I know I've got this in my back pocket. I always know who I am then. And when you know who you are as an athlete and as a person, you're a scary competitor because it means you can't be beat or rattled by small things. And even the bigger stuff, you don't sweat about. Because you know you're capable of hitting that shot. You've done it a million times. And in fact, you actually like that moment. You want to be in that position. You know how to get where you need to get. So an evidence list is just reminding you of all those moments that you've done this before.
Now some mistakes to avoid when building an evidence list is when we think evidence lists think the best moments The highlight real moments, the most emotional, impactful moments, or just the really good feelings. So here's an example. When was your best game? Do you have a moment where you hit a shot that just shut up the other team? Were you just on fire and you couldn't miss if you tried to miss? Everything's going in the basket. Or if it was a race, you just felt like you were flying and everything was effortless and easy. Felt like the game had slowed down for you, and you're in flow or in the zone. Think of those moments and remember what it felt like to be there. You can think of all the different sensations. You can see it through your eyes again. What was the taste in your mouth? What did you smell? What did you hear around you? What was the feeling of the ball in your hands? or your feet on the ground, and just list out that moment, that time, that game, that day.
You'll notice these are very intentional words. And I want you to have intentional Clear action as you're writing your evidence list. We want good things. We want all the good proof to our brain and body that we can do this. So don't think of the one time you missed. Don't think of the one time you had a bad moment. And actually avoid the word don't. Instead, be very clear, very distinct memories. And write a big list and start with that. If you can write down 10, 20, 30 moments. Then, when you go before a game, you can have a physical list in front of you. You can have a note on your phone. You can have a single picture. You can have a recording play. The point being is that when you need it, you have this list to remind you: hey, this is what I'm really capable of, not those moments of uncertainty or doubt.
One of the questions I also get is, well, what counts in an evidence list? How much do I need or what if I have that bad day? Bad days don't go on the evidence list. They're the outlier. That's an anecdote. For most high school athletes, it's typical to have a 12 to 16 week season. You're usually doing your sport about five days a week. And so, if we think of a 12-week season times five days, that's 60 times that you've warmed up. That's 60 practices that you've gone to. That's 60 times that you got better or worked on your craft. Most people don't do anything five times or ten times and they give up. You did something 60 times. And even if it was 60 times you didn't really know if you wanted to be there, you still showed up. And that's the beauty of an evidence list.
How many people do something sixty times that's hard? Sixty times that they don't want to and they still show up. Not many.
And so I want you to just right now take two to three minutes. And what's your best moment? Like my favorite moment. For my evidence list is really hard workouts and When I was going from a freshman in college to a sophomore in college at Trine, I was lifting up my old high school. And I was doing a certain program, and I had friends over, and I said, Hey, I'm going to the gym. It was like five, five, six in the morning. I hadn't slept yet. We were playing video games and watching movies and having a good time. And I went to the gym at five in the morning, six in the morning to my old high school, and I set a PR deadlifting. I'd lifted more weight than I ever lifted in my life on no sleep. It was a heck of a thing. I was really happy about it. I went back home and then went to sleep for a couple hours. And the magical thing that I add to my evidence list there is: I can perform on no sleep. I can be stronger than I've ever been before on no sleep. So if I've got to go to the gym and practice and lift, no matter how I feel, I can show up and be strong.
Another moment I had to my evidence list was: Every workout I did from August to December 3rd was the hardest workout I'd ever done at Trine, my freshman year. Literally, every practice I went to was the hardest thing I'd ever done. And the beauty in this is that. When it came time, the week of our first meet, it was a Tuesday, and I ran three, there are two sets of three, 200 meters. So I did six 200-meter reps in practice. I remember actually laughing when I saw the workout and laughing as I did the workout because it was the easiest thing I'd ever done compared to all the hard workouts we'd done before. Two weeks before, we'd done 20 times 200. This was 14 less. This is a cakewalk. I can do this. This is no problem. And that's the feeling I want you to have on game day. I can do this. This is no problem. This is what I do. This is what I'm good at. This is what I like to do. And we're reframing our brain from worrying about physical sensations or symptoms or. Focusing on something small and crazy. No. This is who I am. This is what I do. And here's the proof that I've done it.
So as a quick recap, when we're building out an evidence list, list the best moments. This could be your best game. This could be your best practice. It could even just be a good rep. Like, I remember my best block start ever. The irony is I got hurt later in the day, but hey, I remember my best day of block starts, and I still think about that when I push and accelerate. I think about the day that I lifted the most weight on no sleep, deadlifting. And I think about my best meats. Those are things that are in my evidence list. Those are things that I pull on when I think, who am I? So think best first. Next, think most emotional impact. So it might be your favorite moment. It might be something that makes you inspired or awe. Think awe. Don't think happy. It's bigger than that. For me, I was just so impressed. Not just that we'd won an indoor conference championship, but I remember like throughout the meet. I was so impressed at how my teammates had shown up and really gave it their all. With an 800-meter runner who Scored more points than he should have. We had people volunteering and work hard and show up for their teammates. We had our best sprinter run the last leg of our of the last race of the last relay. And collapse in our coach's arms after the race. But we won a championship because of him. Those are the things that I think of. For emotional impact. So think of it for you. What was the race that you ran that changed everything? What was the shot you hit that changed everything? What are the moments you go to when you think of yourself as an athlete, as a player, as a performer? Those are the moments that get put in the evidence list.