Onboarding Pregame Panic Protocol (PGP)
You aren’t broken. There’s nothing wrong with you.
No one taught you what anxiety was, how to deal with it, and what YOUR own personal gameday plan should be.
Module 1: Understanding Anxiety + Building Your Evidence List
1. Anxiety is a Skill Issue
2. Physical Symptoms vs. Mental Ruminating
3. The Escalator of Doom and Emotional Hijacking
4. What's an Evidence List? Why do we use one?
5. Mistakes to Avoid when Building YOUR Evidence List
6. How to Build Your Evidence List
7. FAQ: What counts? How much do I need? What if I have a bad day?
8. Watch Me Build an Evidence List in less than 5 minutes
9. Use These Tools to Build Your Evidence List Faster
10. Your Homework: Build your First Evidence List
Module 2: Fear Setting + Mental Performance Toolkit
1. Here's Why We use the Fear Setting Exercise
2. Here's how to use Fear Setting Right Before you Compete to Calm Nerves
3. Avoid these Mistakes when Fear Setting
4. FAQ: What if the Worst Case Scenario happens? What if this makes me more anxious?
5. Watch me Go Through the Fear Setting Exercise
6. Dealing with Expectation Pressure
   * Quick role clarity
   * Managing parent/coach pressure basics
7. Why You Need a Mental Performance Toolkit
8. Mistakes to Avoid with Your Toolkit
9. Scripting, Visualizations, Highlight Reels, and Reframes
10. FAQs: How do I know it's working? When should I use each tool?
11. Watch the Pros use Visualization
12. Watch me go through my ToolKit
13. The Script Framework, Highlight Reel Template, Reframing Worksheet
14. Tools to Make Fear Setting Effortless
15. Your Homework: Complete Fear Setting Exercise + Build your First Toolkit
Module 3: The Emergency Response System for Gameday
1. It's Gameday... and I'm Freaking Out
2. Mistakes to Avoid BEFORE Gameday
3. Mistakes to Avoid on Gameday
4. How to Hit the Red Panic Button if you get Hacked on Gameday
5. You are always in Control: How to Calm yourself down and Downregulate
6. FAQ: What if NOTHING works? How do I practice this? How fast does it work?
7. My Red Panic Button Moments and How I dealt with them
8. Tools to have Ready on Gameday: Your Quick Response Checklist
9. More Bonuses: The Emergency Protocol Card + Recovery Framework
10. Your Homework: Build up your Emergency Response System
Module 4: Your Complete Pregame Panic Protocol
1. Let's put it all Together: Why you should have a Pregame Panic Protocol
2. Make it Work for you: Mistakes to Avoid with your PGP
3. How to Build Your PGP
4. How to Test and Tweak your PGP in Practice Automatically
5. FAQ: What if something stops working? How do I know it's complete?
6. A Walkthrough of My PGP from the Biggest days of My Life
7. Your PGP Checklist and Template
8. Your Homework: Build your own Personal Pregame Panic Protocol
9. Bonus: How to Reflect after Gameday
Bonus Module: Managing Role & Expectations (Full Deep Dive)
1. What's your Role on the Team and Why that Matters
2. Rookie Mistakes to Avoid
3. What Captains and Coaches get wrong
4. How to get Clarity on Your Role and What's Expected of You
5. FAQ: What if my Role Changes? How do I handle Team Pressure?
6. The Problem Parent Trap
7. Watch me Walkthrough my Role and Expectation Setting
8. Make it Easy to Know Your Job with the Attitudes, Habits, and Beliefs Framework
9. A Quick Guide with Talking to Your Coach
10. How to keep your Parents from Hacking you
11. Your Homework: Define your Role on the Team. Make your Expectations Clear.